<!-- Notes:

" In the first phase the Markov chain converges towards the typical set from its initial
position in parameter space while the Markov chain Monte Carlo estimators suffer from
strong biases (Figure 7a). The second phase begins once the Markov chain finds the typical
set and persists through the first sojourn across the typical set. This initial exploration
is extremely effective and the accuracy of Markov chain Monte Carlo estimators rapidly
improves as the bias from the initial samples is eliminated (Figure 7b). The third phase
consists of all subsequent exploration where the Markov chain refines its exploration of the
typical set and the precision of the Markov chain Monte Carlo estimators improves, albeit
at a slower rate (Figure 7c)." - https://arxiv.org/pdf/1701.02434




" The importance of detailed balance is its
role in assuring self-adjointness of the operator that propagates probabilities." - https://arxiv.org/pdf/1402.7107 -->



!!! Prereqs

    This section assumes that the reader is familiar with MCMC, the MH algorithm, and Hamiltonian Monte Carlo.

## Metropolis Hastings

For an introduction to the Metropolis-Hastings (MH) algorithm, see https://ermongroup.github.io/cs228-notes/inference/sampling/. In brief, we construct a step in our MCMC chain by sampling from some $q(z'|z)$ and accepting this sample with probability 

$$\mathrm{min} \big( 1,  \frac{q(z | z') p(z')}{q(z' | z) p(z)}\big)
$$


<!-- $$
W(z', z) = \frac{q(z | z') p(z')}{q(z' | z) p(z)}
$$ -->


For present purposes, we are concerned with $q$ deterministic and reversible, i.e. $q(z'|z) = \delta(\phi(z, T)-z')$, where $\phi$ is defined by an ODE:

$$
\frac{d}{dt}\phi(z,t) = F(\phi(z,t))
$$

with $\phi(z,0)=z$. The key insight is that we can then derive the following equation 


$$
-\log\frac{q(z | z') p(z')}{q(z' | z) p(z)} = -\log \frac{p(z(T))}{p(z(0))} - \int_{0}^T \nabla \cdot F(z(s)) ds := W(\gamma_{z,T})
$$

where $W$ is to be viewed as a quantity that depends on the path of the trajectory $\gamma = z([0,T])$. (More technically, let $\bar{dW}$ be a non-exact 1-form, with $W(\gamma_{z,T}) := \int_{\gamma_{z,T}} \bar{dW}$). The name $W$ is suggestive: there is a relationship between $W$ and the physical quantity work.

??? Derivation

    First recall that $\delta(x-a)f(x) = \delta(x-a)f(a)$, and $\delta(f(x)) = \sum_i \delta(x-a_i)|\frac{df}{dx}a_i|^{-1}$, where $a_i$ are the roots of $f$. 

    In our case, $f(z) = \phi(z)-z'$, so that $\delta(\phi(z)-z) = \delta(z-\phi(z'))|\frac{\partial \phi}{\partial z}(\phi(z'))|^{-1} = \delta(z-\phi(z'))|\frac{\partial \phi}{\partial z}(z)|^{-1}$.

    Then

    $$
        \frac{q(z | z')}{q(z' | z)} = \frac{\delta(\varphi(z') - z)}{\delta(\varphi(z) - z')} = \frac{\delta(\varphi(z') - z)}{\delta(z - \varphi(z'))} \, | \frac{\partial \varphi}{\partial z}(z) | = | \frac{\partial \varphi}{\partial z}(z) |
    $$

    [Jacobi's formula](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jacobi%27s_formula) for an operator $M$ yields:


    $$
    \det D_z\phi(z,T) = \det D_z\phi(z,0)\exp(\int_0^T tr(DF(\phi(z,s))) ds)
    $$

    Noting that the trace of the Jacobian is the divergence $\nabla \cdot F$, we obtain the desired result.

<!-- $$
\frac{d}{dt}\det M = \det(M)tr(M^{-1}\frac{dM}{dt})
$$

which specializes to the Jacobian $D_z\phi(z,T)$ to give:

$$
\frac{d}{dt}\det D_z\phi(z,T) = \det(D_z\phi(z,T))tr(D_z\phi(z,T)^{-1}\frac{dD_z\phi(z,T)}{dt})
$$

$$
= \det(D_z\phi(z,T))tr(D_z\phi(z,T)^{-1}DF)
$$

by the basis independence of the trace. Exponentiating, we obtain: -->

The usefulness of this formula is that it lets us derive both the MH update for HMC, but also other dynamics, such as MCLMC.

## MH for HMC

In this setting, our variable of interest is $z = (x, p)$, where $x$ is the variable of our target distribution, and $\Pi$ is an auxiliary momentum. We define $\varphi$ as:

$$
    \varphi = \mathcal{T}\circ \Phi_{t/n}^{\circ n} := \mathcal{T}\circ \underbrace{\Phi_{t/n} \circ \Phi_{t/n} \circ \cdots \Phi_{t/n}}_n \\
$$

where

$$    
\mathcal{T}(x, p) = (x, \, -p),
$$

$$    
\Phi_{\epsilon} = B_{\epsilon/2} \circ A_{\epsilon} \circ B_{\epsilon/2},
$$

$$    
A_{\epsilon}(x, p) = (x + \epsilon p, \, p)
    \qquad 
    B_{\epsilon}(x, p) = (x, \, p + \epsilon \nabla \log p(x)) 
$$

$\Phi_\epsilon$ is a discretization of Hamilton's equations of motion, while $\mathcal{T}$ ensures reversibility

In addition, after each $\Phi$ proposal, we update momentum $p$ by resampling according to the marginal distribution. 

The maps $A$ and $B$ are generated by dynamical systems with  $\dot z = [p, \, 0]$ and $\dot z = [0, \nabla \log p(x)]$ respectively, so that both have vanishing divergence: $\nabla \cdot \dot z = [\frac{\partial}{\partial x}p , \frac{\partial}{\partial p}0] = 0$ and $\nabla \cdot \dot z = [\frac{\partial}{\partial x}0 , \frac{\partial}{\partial p}\nabla \log p(x)] = 0$. 

So only the first term in our equation for work survives, giving $W(t) = H(z(t)) - H(z(0))$, which is the *total energy change* incurred by the proposal. 

## MH for MCLMC

For Microcanonical Hamiltonian Monte Carlo, we can follow a similar route to obtain $W$. Remarkably, we find that it is still equal to the change in total energy.

The analysis of $W$ for MCHMC proceeds similarly, with our full state space now $\mathcal{M} = \mathbb{R}^d \times S^{d-1}$ and the stationary distribution $p(z) \propto p(x) U_{S^{d-1}}(u)$, where $z = (x, u)$ and $U_{S^{d-1}}$ is the uniform distribution on the sphere (with respect to the standard metric).  Note that the stationary distribution $p(z)$ is chosen in a way that the marginal $\int p(x, u) d u = p(x)$ is the target distribution that we want to sample from.


The dynamics

$$
    A_{\epsilon}(x, u) = (x + \epsilon u, \, u).
    \qquad 
    B_{\epsilon}(x, u) = (x, \, F_{\epsilon}(\boldsymbol{e}(x), u)) 
$$

where 

$$
    F_{\epsilon}(\boldsymbol{e}, u) = \frac{u + (\sinh{\delta}+ \boldsymbol{e} \cdot u (\cosh \delta -1)) \boldsymbol{e} }{\cosh{\delta} + \boldsymbol{e} \cdot u \sinh{\delta}} ,
$$

$$
\delta = \epsilon \vert \nabla V(x) \vert / (d-1) 
$$

$$
\boldsymbol{e} = - \nabla V(x) / \vert \nabla V(x) \vert
$$


We now calculate $W$ using the equation for work. The $A$ update is generated by $\dot z = [u, 0]$ which is divergence-free. Thus $W(T) = V(x(T)) - V(x(0))$, the change in potential energy (the kinetic energy cancels).

As for the $B$ update, we find that:

$$
    W(T) = - \int_0^T \nabla \cdot F(z(s)) d s = (d-1) \log \{ \cosh{\delta} + \boldsymbol{e} \cdot u \sinh{\delta} \}
$$

??? Derivation

    We first note that $W$ is a function of $\frac{p(z')}{p(z)}|\frac{d z'}{dz}|$ which is coordinate invariant (since $p(z')dz' = p(z)dz$). So we'll pull back to a coordinate $\theta$ with

    $$
        u = \cos \theta \boldsymbol{e} + \sin \theta \boldsymbol{f},
    $$

    for some unit vector $\boldsymbol{f}$, orthogonal to $\boldsymbol{e}$. $\theta$ is then a coordinate on the $S^{d-1}$ manifold. Then, the momentum updating map is
    $$
        u' = \frac{1}{\cosh \delta + \cos \theta \sinh \delta} u + \frac{\sinh \delta + \cos \theta (\cosh \delta -1)}{\cosh \delta + \cos \theta \sinh \delta} \boldsymbol{e}
    $$

    $$
    = \frac{\sinh \delta + \cos \theta \cosh \delta}{\cosh \delta + \cos \theta \sinh \delta} \boldsymbol{e} + \frac{\sin \theta}{\cosh \delta + \cos \theta \sinh \delta} \boldsymbol{f}
    $$

    so that 

    $$
        \cos \theta' = \frac{\sinh \delta + \cos \theta \cosh \delta}{\cosh \delta + \cos \theta \sinh \delta} \qquad \sin \theta' = \frac{\sin \theta}{\cosh \delta + \cos \theta \sinh \delta}.
    $$


    The Jacobian of the $\theta \mapsto \theta'$ transformation, which is the second term of the work, is
    $$
        \bigg|\frac{d \theta'}{d \theta} \bigg|= \bigg|\frac{d \theta'}{d \cos \theta'} \frac{d \cos \theta'}{d \theta}\bigg|=  \frac{1}{\bigg|\cosh \delta + \cos \theta \sinh \delta \bigg|}
    $$

    The first term is

    $$
        \frac{p(\theta')}{p(\theta)} = \sqrt{\frac{g(\theta')}{g(\theta)}} = \bigg(\frac{\sin \theta'}{\sin \theta}\bigg)^{d-2} = \frac{1}{(\cosh \delta + \cos \theta \sinh \delta)^{d-2}}
    $$

    So $\log \frac{p(\theta')}{p(\theta)}|\frac{d \theta'}{d\theta}|$ is obtained as desired.

Notably, this is nothing but the MCHMC kinetic energy, as derived [here](tutorial.md/#time-rescaling). Work therefore equals the MCHMC energy change.

<!-- 

which is the work-energy theorem. But in addition, 

we have, relevant to HMC: -->

!!! Summary 

    One could summarize the situation as follows. If $D$ is the discretization operator, $S$ the rescaling operator, $E$ the total energy, $W(\phi, \gamma)$ the work along a path $\gamma$, $\phi$ our system, and $\gamma_{\phi, T} = \phi^*[0,T]$, we have for any Hamiltonian system:

    $$
    W(\phi, \gamma_{\phi, T}) = E(\phi(T)) - E(\phi(0)) = 0
    $$

    and specifically of relevance for HMC:

    $$
    W(D(\phi), \gamma_{D(\phi), T}) = E(D(\phi)(T)) - E(D(\phi)(0))
    $$

    Meanwhile for MCHMC, we have

    $$
    W(D(S(\phi)), \gamma_{D(S(\phi)), T}) = E(D(S(\phi))(T)) - E(D(S(\phi))(0))
    $$

    

The relevance of this calculation from a computational perspective is that we can keep track of the total energy change in the $A$ and $B$ updates as we numerical integrate, and use it to compute the MH acceptance probability.

## Tuning MH

As with unadjusted MCLMC, we have two paramters, a stepsize $\epsilon$ and a decoherence length $L$. In the adjusted setting, the decoherence length is $N\epsilon$, where $N_p$ is the number of steps in a proposal, so that $N_p = L/\epsilon$.

Tuning follows a similar approach to the unadjusted setting. Again, we first tune stepsize $\epsilon$ to target a particular energy error, and then $L$.

We estimate the optimal acceptance rate to target to be $0.65$ for a first order integrator and $0.8$ for a second order integrator.

??? Derivation

Let's denote by $K_{\mathrm{accepted}}$ the number of accepted proposals that we need for a new effective sample. This corresponds to travelling a distance on the order of the size of the typical set

$$
    K_{\mathrm{accepted}} N \epsilon \propto \sqrt{d}
$$

since $\sqrt{d}$ is that size of the standard Gaussian typical set. The number of effective samples per gradient call is then


$$
    \mathit{ESS} = \frac{1}{K_{\mathrm{total}} N} = \frac{P(\mathrm{accept})}{K_{\mathrm{accepted}} N} \propto \frac{\epsilon P(\mathrm{accept})}{\sqrt{d}}
$$

We now relate $P(\mathrm{accept})$ to step size $\epsilon$.

We do this in several steps. First we note that from MCLMC, there is a known relationship between expected energy variance and $\epsilon$, namely:

$$
    \sigma^2 / d \propto \epsilon^4 / d^2,
$$

Second, we observe that we can relate energy variance to energy bias. This relies on the fact that energy bias is precisely the work, as discussed above. To do so, first note that

$$
\int p(z) \frac{q(z \vert z') p(z')}{q(z' \vert z) p(z)} d z = \int p(z') {\vert} \frac{\partial \varphi}{\partial z}(z) {\vert} d z = \int p(\varphi(z)) d \varphi(z) = 1
$$

On the other hand, for $W(z) := -\log\frac{q(z \vert z') p(z')}{q(z' \vert z) p(z)}$:

$$
\int p(z) \frac{q(z \vert z') p(z')}{q(z' \vert z) p(z)} d z = E_{z \sim p}[e^{-W(z)}] = E_{W \sim W^*p}[e^{-W}] 
$$

$$
\approx \int_{- \infty}^{\infty} \frac{1}{\sqrt{2 \pi \sigma^2}} e^{-(W- \mu)^2 / 2\sigma^2} e^{-W} d W = e^{\frac{\sigma^2}{2} - \mu}
$$

where we have approximated the pushforward distribution $W^*p$ as a Gaussian with mean $\mu$ and variance $\sigma^2$ and then applied a Gaussian integral.



So $e^{\frac{\sigma^2}{2} - \mu} = 1$, implying that $\mu = \frac{\sigma^2}{2}$.

We now relate $\mu$ to $P(\mathrm{accept})$.

In equilibrium, $P(W > 0 \vert \mathrm{accepted}) = P(W < 0 \vert \mathrm{accepted}) = \frac{1}{2}$ by the design of the MH criterion. Since $P(\mathrm{accepted} | W < 0) = 1$,  we have that $\frac{1}{2} = P(w < 0 | \mathrm{accepted}) = \frac{P(W < 0 | \mathrm{accepted})P(W < 0)}{P(a)} = \frac{P(W < 0)}{P(a)}$, so $P(\mathrm{accepted}) = 2 P(W < 0)$. Therefore:

$$
P(\mathrm{accept}) = 2 \Phi(-\mu / \sigma) =  2 \Phi(-\mu / \sqrt{2 \mu}),
$$

where $\Phi$ is the Gaussian cumulative density function.

So we have related $\epsilon$ to $\sigma$, $\sigma$ to $\mu$, and $\mu$ to $P(\mathrm{accept})$ and $P(\mathrm{accept})$ to ESS. Putting this all together:

$$
    ESS \propto \mu^{1/4} \, \Phi(-\sqrt{\mu/2}) \, d^{-1/4} ,
$$

so we see that the efficiency drops as $d^{-1/4}$.

ESS is maximal at $\mu = 0.41$, corresponding to $P(\mathrm{accept}) = 65 \%$. We then see that the optimal stepsize grows only as $\epsilon \propto d^{1/4}$ instead of $d^{1/2}$ if the efficiency was unimpaired.

Note that this result is different if a higher order integrator is used. For example, using a fourth order integrator $\sigma^2 / d \propto (\epsilon^2/d)^4$ and the optimal setting is $\mu = 0.13$ and $P(\mathrm{accept}) = 80 \%$.




We then use the dual averaging optimization scheme to find an $\epsilon$ which produces an energy error which yields this acceptance probability. However, the adjusted setting has a nontrivial relationship between $L$ and $\epsilon$, so we change $\epsilon$ with fixed $N$ (i.e. updating $L$ with each change of $\epsilon$.)

We then estimate $L$ by the variance of the distribution, as in the unadjusted case. However, we must now rerun the dual averaging scheme, this time for $L$ fixed and $N_p$ variable.


## Thereoms about $W = \Delta E$

Let $M$ be the configuration manifold, i.e. the manifold on which $x$ is valued. We are concerned with two transformations, $S$, and $v \mapsto \frac{v}{|v|}$, which commute:

$$
\begin{CD}
T(T^*M) @>{S(F) = |v|F}>> T(T^*M)\\
@VVV @VV{B(v)=\frac{v}{|v|}}V \\
T(S(M)) @>{}>> T(S(M))
\end{CD}$$

Here, the Sundman transform $S$ is a gauge transform on the outer tangent bundle, which maps $F(z)$ to $|v|F(z)$.

The second transform $B$ is a bundle morphism on the inner bundle, which maps $v$ to $\frac{v}{|v|}$, and can be lifted to the full bundle as $B^*$, in the usual way.

Define $T_1(F) = -\log \frac{p(z(T))}{p(z(0))}$, where $p$ is understood to be stationary under $F$. Define $T_2(F) = -\int_{0}^T \nabla \cdot F(z(s)) ds$. Then $W(F) = T_1(F) + T_2(F)$.


    
Suppose we have a system generated by a vector field $F$ (i.e. $\dot z = F(z)$)  where we have

$$
T_1(F) + T_2(F) = -\log \frac{p(z(T))}{p(z(0))} - \int_{0}^T \nabla \cdot F(z(s)) ds = E(z(T)) - E(z(0))
$$

If we perform a transformation to $S(f)$, i.e. conformal transformation on the vector field to obtain $S(F)(z) = a(z)F(z)$, we want to show that:

$$
T_1(S(F)) + T_2(S(F)) = E(z'(T)) - E(z'(0))
$$

where $\dot z' = S(F)(z')$.

<!-- $s(t) = \int_0^t a(z'(s)) ds$. -->

Similarly for $B^*(S(F))$, we want to obtain an analogous result.



### Proof sketch

#### Lemma 1:

Let $F$ be a vector field, or in more general terms, a section of a vector bundle, and define $z$ by $\dot z = F(z)$. Then we have a (microcanonical) stationary distribution of the form $\rho(z) \propto \sqrt{g}(z)\delta(\Lambda(z) - c)$, where $\Lambda$ is a conserved quantity, and $g$ is a metric on phase space given by $g(z)=e^{-w(z)}$, where $w$ is defined by $\frac{d}{dt}w = \nabla \cdot F$.

??? Proof

    First recall that for a compressible flow $\dot z = G(z)$, we have the standard result that

    $$
    |\frac{\partial z(t,z_0)}{\partial z_0}| = e^{\int_0^t \kappa ds}
    $$

    where $\kappa = \nabla \cdot G$. Suppose there exists a definite integral, i.e. a $w$ with $\frac{d}{dt}w = \kappa$, and define a metric on phase space by $\sqrt{g(z)} = e^{-w(z)}$.

    It can then be shown that a generalized Louville equation[^1] exists:

    [^1]: https://web.archive.org/web/20100612191643id_/http://homepages.nyu.edu/~mt33/abstracts/JChemPhys_115_1678.pdf

    $$
    \partial_t (\rho \sqrt{g}) + \nabla \cdot (\rho \sqrt{g} F) = 0
    $$

    so that $\Pi_i(\delta(\Lambda_i(z)- c))\sqrt{g(z)}dz$ is an invariant volume form, as desired.






Now we calculate.

First, for $F$ a Hamiltonian vector field, we have $\nabla \cdot F = 0$, so that the metric is flat, and $H$ is preserved, so the stationary distribution is the (flat) microcanonical distribution: $\rho(z) \propto \delta(H(z) - c)$. Then $T_1(F) = 0 = T_2(F) = E(z(T))-E(z(0))$, as desired.

Now consider $S(F)(z) = a(z)F(z)$. Let us calculate $\sqrt{g}$. We observe that $\frac{dw}{dt} = \nabla w \cdot \dot z = \nabla w \cdot F$, so the property that $w$ must satisfy is, in the case of $F'$ is:

$$
F' \cdot \nabla w = \nabla \cdot F'
$$

or 

$$
aF \cdot \nabla w = \nabla \cdot (aF) 
$$

$$
= a\nabla\cdot F + F \cdot \nabla a = F \cdot \nabla a  = aF \cdot \frac{\nabla a}{a} = aF \cdot \nabla (\log a)
$$

This demonstrates that our $w$ is $\log a$.

We then see that the first term, $-\log \frac{p'(z'(T))}{p'(z'(0))}$, is equal to $-\log \frac{\sqrt{g(z'(T))}}{\sqrt{g(z'(0))}} = \log a(s(T)) - \log a(0)$ (where $s(t) = \int_0^t a(z'(s)) ds$). Note that we include the metric in the stationary distribution, since it is this full object which is stationary.

If our original system has a kinetic energy $\log a$, then we see that the first term is the change in kinetic energy (in rescaled time).

We now consider the second term, $\int_{0}^T \nabla \cdot F'(z'(s)) ds$. We find:

$$
\int_{0}^T \nabla \cdot F'(z'(s)) ds = \int_{0}^T \nabla \cdot (a(z)F(z'(s))) ds
$$


$$
\int \nabla \cdot F' = \int \nabla \cdot (aF)
$$

$$
= \int F\cdot\nabla a
$$

If $\nabla a = v$ (i.e. $\nabla_v a = v$ and $\nabla_x a = 0$), then we have the result that the second term equals the (negative) change in the *standard* kinetic energy, by the work-energy theorem. 

Indeed, for $a=|v|$, we have $\nabla |v| = \frac{v}{|v|}$, and now we do a change of measure to obtain:

$$
\int_0^{T} \frac{1}{|v(s(t))|} F(x(s(t)))\cdot v(s(t))dt = \int_0^{s(T)} F(x(s))\cdot v(s) ds = \Delta K
$$

But we also see that $\int \nabla \cdot F = w(z(T)) - w(z(0))$, simply by the defining property of $w$, so that the second term always cancels the first.


Now we finally note that $H$ is conserved by the time rescaling, and since $T_1 = -T_2$, we have $W = 0 = \Delta E$. (Note that this argument does not apply to volume conservation, since points in different parts of the volume move on different clocks).

Finally, we consider $B^*S(F)$. Recall that now, $\dot u \propto -(I-uu^T)\nabla V(x) = -\nabla V(x) + (u\cdot \nabla V(x))u$, so for $B^*S(F)(u) =  -\nabla V(x) + (u\cdot \nabla V(x))u$, we calculate that $\nabla\cdot B^*S(F) \propto u\cdot \nabla V(x)$, so that $w \propto V(x)$, since $\frac{d}{dt}V(x) = \nabla V(x) \cdot \dot x = \nabla V(x) \cdot u$. 

So $T_1 = \log V(x(s(T))) - \log V(x(s(0))) = \Delta V$, the change in potential energy. This is cancelled by the second term, for the same reason as above.

On the other hand, $T_2$ is calculated as $-\int \nabla \cdot B^*S(F) = \propto -\int u\cdot \nabla V(x) = \int u\cdot F = \int_0^{T} \frac{1}{|v(s(t))|} F(x(s(t)))\cdot v(s(t))dt = \int_0^{s(T)} F(x(s))\cdot v(s) ds$ which is the change in quadratic kinetic energy.

And again, $E$ is conserved, since we have not changed the field $F$, but just the coordinates.

<!-- invariant under $B^*$, since we haven't changed $F$, only the underlying manifold (is this true?).  -->

So now $W = T_1 + T_2 = \Delta V - \Delta V = 0 = \Delta E$, as desired.















<!-- For $S(F)$, $w = \log |v|$ (one choice of potential energy) so that the metric is $\frac{1}{|v|}$, and $H$ is still conserved (since the transformation amounts to a variable time delay), so we have $\rho(z) = \frac{1}{|v|}\delta(H(z) - c)$. -->

<!-- Finally for $B^*S(F)$, we have $w(z) \propto V(x)$, and now $|u|$, or equivalently kinetic energy is conserved, so that $\rho(z) = e^{-V(x)}\delta(|u| - c)$. -->










### Discretization

TODO

<!-- 
We'd also like to show that if $F = (I\otimes F_2) \circ (F_1 \otimes I)$, where $F_1$ and $F_2$ are the vector fields on two subspaces, then:

$$
W(F) = W(F_1 \otimes 1) + W(I \otimes F_2)
$$

It is however not the case that $T_1(F) = T_1(F_1) + T_1(F_2)$, or that $T_2(F) = T_2(F_1) + T_2(F_2)$. -->

